well we begin in Gaza where the largest
medical facility in the southern city of
KH yunes is under
siege Israeli snipers have killed at
least three people and injured 10 others
inside NASA hospital after telling
displaced Palestinians Sheltering there
to leave when people tried to flee they
came under Fire 500 people including
patients and medical staff are still
believed to be trapped inside while the
region of Rafa at the southernmost h of
Gaza has become the last refuge for
hundreds of thousands of Palestinians
fleeing Israeli bombs have a look this
was rougher during times of relative
peace although Israel still bombed the
city several times over recent years the
UN said it was overcrowded even before
this war with a population of
300,000 and this is what parts of Rafa
look like now after four months of War
around 1.5 million Palestinians are
Sheltering here the UN has called it a
press pressure cooker of Despair people
are now being forced to flee again ahead
of a possible Israeli ground offensive
well let's go to our correspondent honey
mmud he joins us now live from Rafa in
southern Gaza hany we know the
bombardment has been escalating over the
last few days talk us through the
situation there on the ground right
now yes well the the situations in in
Rafa City are getting very very critical
at this point with uh much felt of the
sense of desperation and depression
across the city with people inside uh
residential homes uh for Sheltering or
inside the the tents that they have set
up since they arrived to ra City or
simply people who don't have a place and
have been spending uh the vast majority
of their time in the right on the roads
or in the streets of of RA City just
giving you a sense of how terrible the
situations are getting not only there's
an intense bombing campaign going on now
and more of the displaced families and
and individuals who came to ra were
killed here some were seriously injured
but the the usual scenes that we of of
people queuing in line for some water or
for a pack of bread or to get some of
the Food Supplies is just uh turned to
be the quite the normal daily routine
for the thousand thousand literally
thousand of people in every corner of
rafah City despite the the ongoing talks
about a a possible ceasefire deal that
could be reached within the coming days
with lots of un uncertainty going on the
ongoing threats of expanding the
military operations just increasing the
level of panic and and fear among the
the people right here in not only the
the displaced families the 1.5 million
people have been displaced from their
homes in the northern part from Gaza
Central area and more recently from Khan
Unice where the vast majority of people
who fled the horror of the ongoing
genocidal War are now in a in the fire
line the line in in in in line of fire
as the growing threats of expanding the
operation in in raah City on top of that
when we talk about public facilities
particularly healthc care facilities in
rafah rafah doesn't have any of the
large Health Care Facilities here and uh
the vast majority of the small side
clinics here are privately on and due to
ongoing bombings they're not operational
at all so they don't they don't have the
capacity accommodate this large number
of people let alone providing the
necessary medical intervention and a
treatment needed for a very traumatized
a displaced population you mentioned
medical facilities or the lack thereof
in Rafa I want to ask you about NASA
Hospital honey we know it's been under
siege for weeks but it feels like things
really intensified there yesterday
what's the situation there now do we
have an idea of how many people are are
trapped inside
still yes well nazer hospital within the
the past few days it's it's important to
mention that this is the 18th day uh
that the hospital under aggressive
military Siege with the snipers
surrounding the hospital uh but the
those who remain inside the hospital
there 300 medical staff 450 a patients
and those who were injured during the
war and and the hundreds hundreds of
evacuees inside the hospital entire
families who uh did not have anywhere to
go other than to shelter inside the
health uh facilities and as if we speak
just within the past hour the isra
military started sharply ordering those
evacuating inside the hospital including
the medical staff and everybody else to
start leaving the hospital what they did
they destroyed the northern gate of of
the hospital block it with a pile of
Sands and and rubbles and only the
Eastern Gate is now open but there are
tanks and armored vehicle station in
front of the gate there
are face recognition cameras Hightech
technology being deployed and installed
at the gates at the Eastern Gate of the
hospital in which people are ordered to
get through it if the for the evacuation
and from past experience setting up
these face recognition cameras and
Hightech equipment for the mass arrest
that is going to happen people are told
to take a route and go all the way to
Gaza European Hospital in Rafa City but
the question remain here is this going
to be their last stub is this the last
place they're going to evacuate to or
are they going to be ask one more time
from Rafa to go elsewhere honey M there
with the latest for us from the ground
in Rafa and Southern Gaza thank you hany
well let's give you some geographical
context the NASA medical complex is in
Unice as you can see they're just north
of Rafa it's the biggest Hospital in
southern Gaza and one of just five
hospitals in the strip that is still
functioning even so it can only offer
basic first aid right now 30 of gaza's
hospitals have shut down due to Israeli
bombardment and a shortage of the most
basic medical supplies well let's bring
in G gimt Tomas she is the Doctors
Without Borders medical coordinator for
Palestine she joins us now from occupied
East Jerusalem GED I I understand that
you currently have inside NASA hospital
what are you hearing from them and how
concerned are you for their safety right
now yes we still have nurses and one
surgeon working inside the hospital um
they are facing a very difficult
situation now for more than three weeks
with a hospital and the CH they are
totally scared and Afraid for for the
coming hours Gil do you have any idea
can they leave right now and if so where
would they go what are they being told
we know that there are more than 400
patients at least most of them in
critical situation in critical
conditions and U of course the the the
issue is uh is the to be able to provide
adequate care for them and now knowing
the situation in the hospital with the
shortages with the issue of of medical
staff uh the the the situation is really
critical for these patients and we are
very worried about the the future as
we've been reporting things feel like
they've changed in the last day or so
after the hospital still being under
siege for weeks can you give us a sense
of the Dynamics there that you're
hearing from your
staff excuse me I didn't get your your
question clearly that that the hospital
has been surrounded and under siege for
weeks and I'm just wondering how things
have changed in the last 24 hours or
so the last 24 hours have been uh even
more um scaring for everybody because uh
of uh of the the the the fightings
really Clos uh the wanting to to
evacuate the the refugees and the the
displaced people inside and uh the
situation is getting worse and worse
inside uh the the the the medical staff
uh don't know what to do and that's uh
that's really uh really a big issue for
for our staff but for all the the
medical staff inside we've obviously
been hearing about Israeli sniper fire
in and around that medical facility how
much Faith do you as an organization
have in Israeli guarantees of
safety actually uh it's it's a difficult
question they they are seeing that the
he facilities are not targeted uh itself
but the situation we are we have seen
since the beginning of the war uh is is
quite different quite different and we
have seen that chifa hospital ala
hospital um alal Hospital recently have
been
raided by by Israeli forces so um it's a
bit difficult to to be really um to to
be I mean we have we have a lot of
concern about the situation there
because the guarantee are quite weak Gil
talk us through the situation right now
in NASA when it comes to supplies we
know a a little girl who is 10 years old
died in the last couple of days because
the generators had to stop what's
happening
now uh what we know is that the
situation for all the patients are is is
really critical uh there are patients in
ICU so depending the their life are
really depending on the fuel the
equipment the medical equipment and
that's the case for for many patients of
course the the the facility itself is
not able to take care of the patients
the atis are not working the the patient
can't receive uh the the medication so
uh this can lead to a critical situation
where many people can die your
organization Doctors Without Borders is
is working across the strip can you give
us a sense of the state of other medical
facilities in Gaza right now obviously
we know very few of them are actually
still
functioning this is a this is a huge
concern now the only remaining hospital
is the European Gaza Hospital which is
already full uh it is the only one able
to uh to endle with critical patients uh
the only remaining facilities are
partially functioning so that means they
are not able to treat properly the
patient and and this is the case in all
Gaza Strip where 2.5 million people are
leaving so this population is is totally
uh alone and not able to receive any uh
any care that they they they they should
receive and the need are huge the needs
are really important because they are
living in dire conditions for more than
four months now and and the situation is
just getting worse and
worse The Doctors Without Borders
medical coordinator for Palestine thank
you so much for joining us on Al jaaz
gilet and we wish you and and the rest
of your staff all the best with your
work